My first patch set (#2)
Grillo-0/blog: _posts/2023-02-15-my-first-patch-set.md

---
layout: post
title:  "My First Patch Set"
date:   2023-02-15 11:57:26 -0300

> categories: jekyll update

Reviewer: It is good to create different categories so that you can write about other stuff in the future.

---

> Hello everyone! In this Post i will describe my experience writing my first patch set to the Linux

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hello everyone! In this post, I will describe my experience writing my first patch set to the Linux
```

Kernel, more specifically in the [Direct Rendering Manager (DRM)][wikipedia-drm] subsystem.

> ## Why I'm Doing This

Reviewer: It would be nice to hear a little about your engagement with open-source. I mean, why do you use Linux in the first place? Why have you contributed to projects like LLVM previously? This kind of stuff.

> Besides the fun of contributing to a project that millions of people use, This is part of my

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Besides the fun of contributing to a project that millions of people use, this is part of my
```

> initiation on the [GSoC project Idea about Increasing Code Coverage on the DRM

Reviewer: You can explain a bit of the idea of the project.

> code][xorg-gsoc-project-idea], a project that I pretend to do on this year.

Reviewer 2: "pretend" is a false cognate

> ## Patch Set Idea

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Patchset Idea
```

The idea is to decrease number of warnings generated when compiling the AMD GPU drivers with `W=1`.
This is a pretty simple task to start working on, as is not needed an specific hardware to test it.

> Sometimes this work could be viewed as not useful, but it is a much needed job that sometimes is put
> aside on behalf of more urgent problems. It makes the code less error prone, more readable and
> simpler, helping others on developing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes this work could be viewed as not useful, but it is a much-needed job that sometimes is put
aside on behalf of more urgent problems. It makes the code less error-prone, more readable, and
simpler, helping others in developing.
```

## Set Up

> To start I added the `drm-misc` tree as it was recommend.

Reviewer: You can mention that it is also possible to use the amd-staging-drm-next branch.

Author: I myself did not know about that huahuaha, but I'm sure to put that

```bash
git remote add drm-misc git://anongit.freedesktop.org/drm/drm-misc
```

And created a local branch based on the `drm-misc-next` branch.

```bash
git checkout drm-misc/drm-misc-next
git checkout -b fix-warning
```

After that I used the defconfig and added the AMDGPU config as a module with the menuconfig.

```bash
make defconfig
make menuconfig # Add AMDGPU as a module
```

## Workflow

> The workflow is to build and try to resolve the warnings that appear, but the kernel uses the
> `-Werror` flag so the build will stop after any warning. To speed up the process by resolving
> multiples warning in one go it is possible to add `-Wno-error` to `KCFLAGS` in the make command.
> This will compile the module and generate all the warnings presented, this can be a bit overwhelming
> as all types of warnings appear together.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The idea is trying to resolve the warnings that appear when building the AMDGPU code. Considering that the kernel uses the `-Werror` flag, the build will stop after any warning, which can make the development process a bit tricky. To speed up the process it is possible to add `-Wno-error` to `KCFLAGS` in the `make` command. This way you will be able to resolve multiple warnings in one go.

This will compile the module and generate all the warnings, which can be a bit overwhelming as all types of warnings appear together.
```

Reviewer: A suggestion for making the sentence more clear. I guess you can also mention that you are making a W=1 build.

To focus into one warning you can remove the `W=1` flag and add the specific to `KCFLAGS`, so the
final command would be:

```bash
make KCFLAGS='-Wno-error -W<specific-warning>' modules -j8
```

## What was done

The patch set focused in four types of warnings:

- `-Wunused-but-set-variables`
- `-Wenum-conversion`
- `-Wmissing-prototypes`

> - Excess arguments on Kernel docs

Reviewer: A small description of what each warning means would be nice.

At first the set was composed only by 4 patches, one for each type of warning, but after some advice
from [Maíra Canal][maira-canal] they were split even more as different tactics were used to fix the
same type of problem in different places.

## How I Sent

For a more in depth procedure, please read the [kernel documentation about this
topic][kernel-doc-applying-patch].

> First, i used the `check-patch` utility to check all the commits for any code style error

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, I used the `check-patch` utility to check all the commits for any code style error
```

Reviewer 2: Please @Grillo-0 , mark stuff as resolved only after pushing

```bash
./scripts/check-patch --strict -g HEAD..drm-misc/drm-misc-next
```

Arguments:
- `--strict`: enable more subjective tests
- `-g HEAD..drm-misc/drm-misc-next`: check all the commit until the drm-misc-next branch

> To make the patch set i used the git format-patch utility

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To format the patchset I used the git format-patch utility
```

```bash
# On the fix-warning branch
git format-patch drm-misc/drm-misc-next -o outgoing --cover-letter
```

Arguments:
- `drm-misc/drm-misc-next`: get all the commits until the drm-misc-next branch
- `-o outgoing`: place the patches on the outgoing directory
- `--cover-letter`: generate a first patch file with a cover letter to write about the whole patch

After I wrote my cover letter and made various sanity checks such as: compiling the kernel one more
time and reading the patch files to spot any errors. I used the `get_maintainer` utility to find the

> emails and mail list that i had to send my patches.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
maintainers and mailing lists to which I had to send my patches.
```

```bash
./scripts/get_maintainer.pl outgoing/*
```

Arguments:
- `outgoing/*`: read all the patches inside the `outgoing` directory

After that I used the `git send-email` to send the patches to all the emails that were maintainers
or supporters on the `get_maintainer` output and to the dri-devel and amd-gfx mailing lists.

```bash
git send-email \
--to='amd-gfx@lists.freedesktop.org, dri-devel@lists.freedesktop.org' \
--cc='<emails-of-maintainers-and-subscribers>' outgoing/*
```

> To a tutorial on how to setup git send email, I recommend the [sourcehut

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To a tutorial on how to setup git send-email, I recommend the [sourcehut
```

tutorial][sourcehut-tutorial].

After all this work I needed to wait for responses and hope that any dumb errors were present :).

## How the Patch was Received

Fortunately the patches had a pretty good response!

> The [first version of the patch set][first-patch] was with sent 10 patches. Six of them were
> accepted with no requests for changes. The other four received different responses. One was thought
> unnecessary, other hasn't had any response yet, and the other two were requested some modification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [first version of the patch set][first-patch] had 10 patches and six of them were
accepted with no requests for changes. The other four received different responses: One was thought
unnecessary, another hasn't had any response yet, and the other two were requested some modification.
```

Those last couple ones will be sent on the second version of this patch.

##  What To Do Next

> After this first version I'll send a v2 with the 2 patches that were asked revision and the pathc

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After this first version, I'll send a v2 with the 2 patches that were asked for revision and the patch
```

that did not receive any response on the v1.

> After that I pretend to add more unit test  with [Kunit][kunit] on the DRM side. I will start by
> running the kernel code coverage tool Gcov. But this will be explained better on a next blog post.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After that, I pretend to keep preparing myself for GSoC 2023! I'm thinking of exploring the unit test on the DRM side with  [Kunit][kunit] on the DRM side. But this will be explained better in the next blog post.
```

[LKCAMP][lkcamp], to the Linux Kernel that I co-developed. The experience of creating it was quite
interesting. After it, I contributed a couple more times, [once to the LLVM][llvm-patch] and again
to the Linux Kernel, where I made [my first own patch][my-first-own-patch].

Now I feel that the [GSoC 2023][gsoc] will be a perfect opportunity to work even more in the
open-source community, something that I really like to do. This patchset is part of my initiation on
the [GSoC project Idea about Increasing Code Coverage on the DRM code][xorg-gsoc-project-idea]. The
main idea is to increase the test coverage of the DRM core helpers by adding more [KUnit][kunit]
tests to it.

## Patchset Idea

The idea is to decrease number of warnings generated when compiling the AMD GPU drivers with `W=1`.
This is a pretty simple task to start working on, as is not needed an specific hardware to test it.

Sometimes this work could be viewed as not useful, but it is a much-needed job that sometimes is put
aside on behalf of more urgent problems. It makes the code less error-prone, more readable, and
simpler, helping others in developing.

## Set Up

> To start I added the [`drm-misc`][drm-misc] tree as it was recommend. (If you want, you can use the

Reviewer 3: Add where?

	Warn when a variable has its value changed but never used in any other way. The warning
	could be indicative that the code its not doing what it was meant to do. It also makes the code
	less readable with dead code.

- `-Wenum-conversion`

	Warn when a value of enumerated type is implicitly converted to a different enumerated type.

- `-Wmissing-prototypes`

	Warn if a global function is defined without a previous prototype declaration.

- Excess arguments on Kernel docs

	Warn when arguments are described on the kernel doc but not present on the function definition.

At first the set was composed only by 4 patches, one for each type of warning, but after some advice
from [Maíra Canal][maira-canal] they were split even more as different tactics were used to fix the
same type of problem in different places.

## How I Sent

For a more in depth procedure, please read the [kernel documentation about this
topic][kernel-doc-applying-patch].

First, I used the `check-patch` utility to check all the commits for any code style error

```bash
./scripts/check-patch --strict -g HEAD..drm-misc/drm-misc-next
```

Arguments:
- `--strict`: enable more subjective tests

> - `-g HEAD..drm-misc/drm-misc-next`: check all the commit until the drm-misc-next branch

Reviewer 3: I think just `-g drm-misc/drm-misc-next` does the trick

To format the patchset I used the git format-patch utility

```bash
# On the fix-warning branch
git format-patch drm-misc/drm-misc-next -o outgoing --cover-letter
```

Arguments:
- `drm-misc/drm-misc-next`: get all the commits until the drm-misc-next branch
- `-o outgoing`: place the patches on the outgoing directory
- `--cover-letter`: generate a first patch file with a cover letter to write about the whole patch

After I wrote my cover letter and made various sanity checks such as: compiling the kernel one more
time and reading the patch files to spot any errors. I used the `get_maintainer` utility to find the

> maintainers and mailing lists to which i had to send my patches.

Reviewer 2: i -> I

```bash
./scripts/get_maintainer.pl outgoing/*
```

Arguments:
- `outgoing/*`: read all the patches inside the `outgoing` directory

After that I used the `git send-email` to send the patches to all the emails that were maintainers
or supporters on the `get_maintainer` output and to the dri-devel and amd-gfx mailing lists.

```bash
git send-email \
--to='amd-gfx@lists.freedesktop.org, dri-devel@lists.freedesktop.org' \
--cc='<emails-of-maintainers-and-subscribers>' outgoing/*
```

To a tutorial on how to setup git send-email, I recommend the [sourcehut

> tutorial][sourcehut-tutorial].

Reviewer 3: hm

> After all this work I needed to wait for responses and hope that any dumb errors were present :).

Reviewer 3: I think you meant 

```suggestion
After all this work I needed to wait for responses and hope that no dumb errors were present :).
```

## How the Patch was Received

Fortunately the patches had a pretty good response!

The [first version of the patch set][first-patchset-version] had 10 patches and six of them were
accepted with no requests for changes. The other four received different responses: One was thought
unnecessary, another hasn't had any response yet, and the other two were requested some
modification.

Those last couple ones will be sent on the second version of this patch.

##  What To Do Next

After this first version I'll send a v2 with the 2 patches that were asked revision and the patch
that did not receive any response on the v1.

> After that, I pretend to keep preparing myself for [GSoC 2023][gsoc]! I'm thinking of exploring the

Reviewer 2: pretend -> intend

Author: huahuahua again :P
